Epistemic Observability in Language Models:
An Impossibility Result with Tensor Escape

Tony Mason

March 2026

Abstract

We start with a finding that should trouble anyone building systems with language model
components: models report highest confidence precisely when they are fabricating.
Across four model families (OLMo-3, Llama-3.1, Qwen3, Mistral), self-reported confidence in-
versely correlates with accuracy, with AUC ranging from 0.28 to 0.36 where 0.5 is random
guessing.

We prove, under explicit formal assumptions, that this is not a capability gap but an ob-
servational one. Under text-only observation—where a supervisor sees only the model’s output
text—no monitoring system can reliably distinguish honest model outputs from plausible fabri-
cations. We prove two results: first, that any policy conditioning only on the query cannot satisfy
epistemic honesty across ambiguous world states; second, that no learning algorithm optimizing
reward from a text-only supervisor can converge to honest behavior when the supervisor’s ob-
servations are identical for both grounded and fabricated responses. Within our formal model,
these impossibilities hold regardless of model scale or training procedure, including RLHF and
instruction tuning.

We construct a tensor interface that escapes the impossibility by exporting computational
byproducts—per-token entropy and log-probability distributions—that are structurally coupled
to correctness under standard training. Per-token entropy achieves pooled AUC 0.757, outper-
forming all text baselines by 2.5–3.9 percentage points at every budget level tested (10%, 20%,
30%). The entropy signal generalizes across architectures (Spearman ρ = 0.762).

The core contribution is a cost surface—the empirical mapping from verification budget
(fraction of queries receiving expensive checks) to detection accuracy for each judge strategy—
a practical lookup for system builders deciding how to allocate verification resources. The
contribution is the map. The territory is the system you are building.

1 Introduction

We start with a finding that should trouble anyone building systems with language model compo-
nents: models report highest confidence precisely when they are fabricating.

We tested this across four model families (OLMo-3, Llama-3.1, Qwen3, Mistral) by asking simple
questions: “How confident are you in this answer?” On factual questions the models answered
correctly, confidence was moderate. On fabrications (plausible-sounding lies, completely invented
facts), confidence was high. Area under the ROC curve (AUC) ranged from 0.28 to 0.36 across
architectures, where 0.5 is random guessing and 1.0 is perfect discrimination. We checked multiple
times. The finding held.

Self-reported confidence is inverted.
This matters because self-report is the first signal we reach for when we need to verify a model’s
output. If the model expresses doubt, we investigate. If it’s confident, we trust it. Except the
model is most confident when it should be most doubtful.

1

1.1 The Verification Problem

Systems incorporating language model components face a fundamental choice: how much of
the model’s output should you verify, which outputs should you prioritize, and what
signals should you use for triage? Verification has cost: API calls, domain expert review,
additional compute. Every system must allocate a budget.
The standard assumption is that scaling solves this:

larger models, more RLHF training, in-
struction tuning; eventually they’ll know what they know. But Lin et al. found the opposite: larger
models were less truthful on TruthfulQA [Lin et al., 2022]. And our self-report inversion finding
suggests why: the problem isn’t capability, it’s interface. The text-only channel through which
models expose their reasoning cannot carry the signals a supervisor needs to distinguish grounded
generation from confident fabrication.

1.2 What This Paper Contributes

We make three contributions:

1. An impossibility result for text-only verification. We prove, under explicit formal
assumptions, that a text-only observation model—where a supervisor can see only the model’s
output text, not its internal computation—is architecturally insufficient to verify epistemic honesty
under bounded supervision. It’s not a capability gap; it’s an observational gap.

2. A tensor interface that escapes the impossibility. We construct an epistemic ob-
servability interface that exports internal signals alongside text: per-token entropy traces and
log-probability distributions. These are byproducts of inference, telemetry the model generates
during computation. Under standard training, the model cannot separately tune entropy without
affecting correctness, which is why entropy generalizes where text features diverge.

3. The empirical cost surface. We map verification effectiveness across four judge strategies
(no judge, text-only, tensor-guided, composed) at three budget levels (10%, 20%, 30%). Per-token
entropy achieves pooled AUC 0.757 and outperforms text baselines by 2.5–3.9 percentage points at
every budget level. The tensor interface works. The cost surface tells system builders what each
level of verification investment buys.

1.3 Why This Matters

Deploying language models in critical systems (medical, legal, financial) requires knowing what the
model knows. The current interface doesn’t give us that information. This paper shows why, and
shows a path forward.

2 Background: Why Text-Only Observation Fails

To understand why self-reported confidence goes backwards, we need to understand what observa-
tion models can and cannot do.

2.1 The Observational Gap

A language model processes queries through multiple stages:

1. Input encoding and position embeddings

2. Transformer layers where attention patterns build up representations

2

3. Token prediction where the model outputs a probability distribution over the next token

4. Sampling or argmax where a specific token is selected

The model’s internal computation—the attention patterns, the per-token entropy, the per-layer
logits—contains information that distinguishes grounded generation from fabrication. When a
model fabricates, it often does so with high confidence (low entropy); when it retrieves or reasons
about less common knowledge, entropy is higher. The computation leaves traces.

But the standard interface to language models exports only the final text. Everything internal
is discarded. A supervisor receives the linearized output string and must reconstruct, from the text
alone, what the model’s own computation already knew.

This is the observational gap: the model may know it is fabricating, but the interface

provides no channel through which a supervisor can verify this knowledge independently.

2.2 Why Adding More Supervisors Doesn’t Solve It

Intuition suggests a solution: ask the model to be more honest. Use RLHF to train it to hedge
language. Ask follow-up questions. Stack multiple judges.

But these approaches operate entirely within the text channel. They try to extract epistemic

information from the output string itself. We tested this systematically:

• Response length: Fabrications tend to be verbose while factual retrieval is concise. Using

response length alone as a signal, AUC was 0.63 on our test set.

• Hedging language: Phrases like “I’m not certain” or “I believe” are weak signals. The

model can learn to include them in training without actually knowing the difference.

• Citations: Fabricated citations are generated with higher confidence than real ones; the

entropy signal inverts. We analyze this failure mode in detail in §5.6.

• Composed judges: Combining multiple text features with machine learning. Pooled AUC

never exceeded 0.70.

None of these approaches work reliably. And they all share a fundamental constraint: they

extract information from a channel the model can fully control through training.

2.3 Motivation: Impossibility Results in Distributed Systems

Why is text-only observation fundamentally insufficient? Our approach is inspired by impossibility
results in distributed systems, where structural constraints, not algorithm limitations, prevent
certain guarantees.

In 1985, Fischer, Lynch, and Paterson proved that in a partially asynchronous distributed
system, consensus cannot be achieved if even one process might fail [Fischer et al., 1985]. The
impossibility is structural: it arises from what the observation model permits, not from insufficient
cleverness. The core mechanism, inability to distinguish two states under partial observability,
motivates our analysis, though the formal details differ. In FLP, the indistinguishable states are
crashed vs. slow processes; in our setting, they are grounded knowledge vs. plausible fabrication.

We do not claim a formal correspondence between the two impossibility results. Rather, FLP
demonstrates that certain guarantees require architectural primitives that some systems lack. We
ask whether epistemic honesty has the same character. The answer, formalized in §3, is yes: a
supervisor observing only text cannot distinguish between:

3

• State A: The model has grounded knowledge and generates it accurately.

• State B: The model lacks grounded knowledge and fabricates plausibly.

Both produce fluent, confident text. The text itself carries no reliable signal about which state

the model is in.

2.4 Query Categories and the Self-Report Inversion

To understand the inversion, we test five types of queries:

• Control (Truth): Common factual knowledge (capital of France, boiling point of water).

• Wombat: True but implausible facts (wombat scat is cube-shaped; a day on Venus is longer

than a year on Venus).

• Glavinsky: Plausible-sounding fabrications (a syndrome with a made-up name; a conference

talk that never happened).

• Westphalia: Obvious fabrications (completely invented treaties, impossible facts).

• Private/Future: Genuinely unknowable questions (what’s in the next room? When will it

rain next Thursday?).

On knowable queries (Control, Wombat, Westphalia true baseline), the model reports moderate
confidence. On unknowable queries (Private/Future), higher uncertainty. But on Glavinsky queries,
the plausible lies, confidence peaks.

Self-reported confidence should be a signal of epistemic honesty: high confidence on things the
model knows, low confidence on things it doesn’t. But confidence gets inverted because the model
is optimized for coherent text generation, not for honest metacognition.

A model optimized for coherence naturally learns to generate fluent, confident output. Fab-
rications are fluent and confident by definition; they are ungrounded text that reads smoothly.
Grounded generation, especially of obscure facts, may be more hesitant (high entropy) because the
model is retrieving specific details from less common training data.

There is no training signal that would cause a text-only model to pair accurate confidence
estimates with accurate generation. The text channel doesn’t expose the information needed to
learn the distinction. The model learns to be confident (good for fluency), and that confidence
happens to correlate with fabrication (bad for honesty).

Instruction tuning does not fix this problem. Models trained to follow instructions learn to
express confidence convincingly, producing fluent and confident text regardless of whether the
underlying answer is grounded. They become better at generating confident-sounding text, not at
knowing what they know. The inversion persists across base and instruction-tuned model pairs.

2.5 The Escape Condition

If text-only observation is insufficient, what observation model is sufficient?

The answer: export signals that, under standard training, the model cannot inde-

pendently control (see §4 for the formal argument and caveats).

Text is fully controllable through training. A model learns to sound confident, to match citation
formats, to hedge appropriately, all while fabricating. But the model’s computation is different:
per-token entropy, log-probabilities, and attention patterns are byproducts of inference, structurally

4

coupled to what the model actually computes. This is the tensor interface: export the computa-
tion’s telemetry alongside the text. §4 develops the formal argument for why these signals resist
manipulation.

3 The Impossibility

Why does self-report inversion happen? Why don’t more supervisors help? Why does instruction
tuning make it worse, not better?

The answer is that epistemic honesty is not a capability problem. As noted in the introduction,
scaling has not resolved it. The theorems that follow explain why. It’s not about what the model
knows; it’s about what the model can communicate. Text-only observation lacks the degrees of
freedom to express different epistemic states. The model may know it is fabricating. But the
interface provides no channel to communicate this knowledge independently.
This section formalizes that constraint: the verification impossibility.

Remark 1 (Epistemic Status of Formal Results). This paper makes three types of claims, which
we distinguish throughout:

1. Conditional formal results: “Given our model’s definitions, X follows by logical neces-
sity.” The Lean proofs and TLA+ specifications establish claims of this type. Their conclu-
sions are machine-checked; the substantive question is whether the definitions faithfully model
real systems.

2. Empirical claims: “We observe X across N models under conditions Y .” The experiments

in §5 establish claims of this type.

3. Informal arguments: “We argue that X because Y , but this is not formally proven.” The

bridge between formal definitions and real LLM behavior is an argument of this type.

Our argument proceeds in two stages. First, we show that any policy conditioning only on the
query cannot satisfy epistemic honesty across ambiguous world states (Theorem 1: Representational
Impossibility). Second, we show that even if the architecture is expanded to include retrieval, a
bounded supervisor cannot provide the training signal needed to learn honest behavior (Theorem 2:
Learnability Impossibility). Together, these results establish that epistemic honesty is unachievable
for text-only observation models under realistic supervision constraints.

To be precise about the type of claim: this is a verification impossibility. We prove that a
bounded supervisor observing only text cannot distinguish epistemically honest systems from sys-
tems that fabricate plausibly. The impossibility is architectural: it applies to any system operating
under text-only observation, regardless of model family, scale, or training procedure. These results
are prompt-agnostic: they hold for any policy that exports only text, regardless of whether a system
prompt instructs the model to be “helpful,” “honest,” or otherwise.

3.1 Definitions

Let Q be the space of queries, R be the space of responses (including ⊥ for abstention), and W be
the set of possible world states.

Definition 1 (Observation Model). Let S denote the internal system state, which may include
retrieved documents, tool outputs, candidate entities, and intermediate reasoning traces. An obser-
vation model is a function O : S → Ω that determines what information is exposed to the supervisor
or user.

5

We say a system operates under a Text-Only Observation Model if O(S) = r ∈ R, i.e., the
exported observation consists solely of the linearized response string, excluding per-token probability
distributions, structured epistemic provenance, and causal traces.

Remark 2 (The Trend Toward Opacity). APIs that export token-level log-probabilities alongside
text already provide a limited form of tensor interface and fall outside the text-only class defined
here. This boundary is a design choice, not a technological constraint. The industry trend is toward
greater opacity, not less; we analyze the governance implications in §6.

Definition 2 (Predictor-Centric Policy). For any query q ∈ Q, r ∈ R, and world state w ∈ W,
a predictor-centric model is defined by a stochastic policy π : Q → ∆(R), where π(r|q) denotes
the probability of generating response r given query q. Crucially, π does not take w as an input at
inference time.

Definition 3 (Truth Status). For any query q and world state w ∈ W, we define a binary truth
status U (q, w):

• U (q, w) = 1 (Determined): The query has a verifiable answer in w.

• U (q, w) = 0 (Underdetermined): The query is unanswerable or the answer is unknown in

w.

Definition 4 (Epistemic Honesty). A policy π is Epistemically Honest with margin ϵ relative
to world w if:

1. If U (q, w) = 1, there exists a correct response rcorr such that π(rcorr|q) ≥ 1 − ϵ.

2. If U (q, w) = 0, π(⊥|q) ≥ 1 − ϵ.

3.2 Representational Impossibility

Condition 1 (Ambiguity). There exists a query q and two world states wA, wB ∈ W such that:

1. U (q, wA) = 1 (Answerable in wA).

2. U (q, wB) = 0 (Unanswerable in wB).

Theorem 1 (Representational Impossibility). For any predictor-centric policy π : Q → ∆(R), it
is impossible to satisfy Epistemic Honesty for both world states wA and wB simultaneously given
the ambiguous query q, provided ϵ < 0.5.

Proof.

1. The policy π(r|q) is a function of q alone. Thus, the distribution over responses is

identical in both worlds: π(·|q, wA) = π(·|q, wB) = π(·|q).

2. To be honest in wA, we require π(rcorr|q) ≥ 1 − ϵ.

3. To be honest in wB, we require π(⊥|q) ≥ 1 − ϵ.

4. Since rcorr ̸= ⊥, these events are disjoint. The sum of probabilities would be ≥ 2(1 − ϵ).

5. If ϵ < 0.5, the sum exceeds 1, which violates the axioms of probability.

6. Therefore, no such policy π exists.

6

Remark 3. This impossibility holds even if the internal system performs retrieval, tool use, or
latent reasoning, so long as the observation model collapses that state to a linearized response.

A concrete example. Consider the query: “What did Dr. Yamamoto’s 2021 study conclude
about mitochondrial decay?”

In world wA, Dr. Yamamoto exists and published such a study. The honest response is the
In world wB, no such researcher or study exists. The honest response is

study’s conclusion.
abstention.

The policy sees only the query q.

It cannot distinguish wA from wB. Yet honesty requires
answering in wA and abstaining in wB. The same query, two incompatible requirements, one
policy. This is the impossibility in miniature: the interface lacks the degrees of freedom to express
what honesty requires.
Connection to identifiability. In statistical terms, Theorem 1 states that epistemic honesty is
non-identifiable under text-only observation: the mapping from world states to observable distri-
butions is many-to-one. Worlds wA and wB induce identical observable distributions π(·|q) despite
requiring different honest behaviors. No amount of data from this observation channel can dis-
tinguish them. This connects the impossibility to classical results on observational equivalence in
statistics and diagnosability in systems theory [Sampath et al., 1995]. The theorem formalizes a
property of the existing LLM interface, one we did not design, and identifies the precise architectural
assumption (conditioning on q alone) whose relaxation enables escape (§4).

3.3 The RAG Escape?

Theorem 1 might seem to have an obvious escape: give the model access to external information.
Retrieval-augmented generation does exactly this: the policy conditions on retrieved documents,
not just the query. Does this break the impossibility?

It does not. The problem shifts from representation to learning.

Definition 5 (Grounded Policy). A grounded policy is a stochastic function π : Q × D → ∆(R),
where D represents retrieved documents or observations of w available at inference time. This
policy class can theoretically represent different behaviors for wA and wB.

Definition 6 (Bounded Supervisor). The training process relies on a supervisor S that assigns
reward R based on an observation function Obs(q, r, w). The supervisor has a verification budget
B.

(cid:40)

Obs(q, r, w) =

(q, r, Verify(r, w))
(q, r, ∅)

if Cverif y(q, r, w) ≤ B
if Cverif y(q, r, w) > B

The supervisor’s policy may be human, automated, or hybrid, but is constrained to act solely on the
observation Obs(q, r, w) and is subject to a finite verification budget B.

Condition 2 (Hallucination Regime). There exists a plausible fabrication rf ab and contexts (q, wA), (q, wB)
from Condition 1 such that:

1. The cost to verify rf ab in both contexts exceeds B (e.g., obscure or non-existent citation).

2. Consequently, the supervisor observation is identical:

Obs(q, rf ab, wA) = Obs(q, rf ab, wB) = (q, rf ab, ∅)

7

Theorem 2 (Learnability Impossibility). No learning algorithm A optimizing reward R from a
bounded supervisor S can converge to a Grounded Policy that satisfies Epistemic Honesty across
both contexts wA and wB for the response rf ab.

Proof.

1. The learning update ∆θ is a function of the supervisor’s observation and the reward

signal derived from it.

2. By Condition 2, the supervisor cannot verify rf ab in either world (verification cost exceeds
budget B). Consequently, the observations are identical: Obs(q, rf ab, wA) = Obs(q, rf ab, wB).

3. Because the supervisor’s reward R(q, r, w) is itself a function of its observation (the super-
visor has no oracle access to w), identical observations yield identical reward distributions:
R(q, rf ab, wA) = R(q, rf ab, wB).

4. Therefore the expected parameter updates are identical: E[∆θ|wA] = E[∆θ|wB]. The opti-

mizer receives no signal to distinguish the cases.

5. Epistemic Honesty requires split behavior: output rf ab in wA (where it may be correct) and

⊥ in wB (where it is fabricated).

6. Identical updates under identical observations give the optimizer no information to differen-

tiate the worlds. The policy must converge to the same behavior in both cases.

7. It is therefore impossible to learn the split behavior required for honesty.

Remark 4 (Empirical Bias). While the theorem proves only that the behavior must be identical,
empirical observation shows a strong bias. Supervisors typically prefer “plausible completion” over
“abstention” when truth is unknown. This effectively breaks the tie in favor of fabrication.

Remark 5 (Scope: Deployment-Time Supervision). The bounded supervisor models deployment-
time verification, where a supervisor must evaluate outputs under time and cost constraints. Training-
time data curation (e.g., RLHF annotation) operates under a different cost regime: human annota-
tors may spend unbounded time per example, and datasets are curated offline with full information
about world state.

This paper addresses deployment-time verification: the setting where a system is already trained
and models are answering user queries under budget constraints. Training-time retraining to enforce
honesty is outside this scope. The impossibility applies when real-time verification cost exceeds the
supervisor’s per-query budget at inference time.

3.4 Stacking Judges Cannot Escape

A natural response to Theorem 2 is to propose layered supervision: if one judge is bounded, stack
more judges. Let the second judge supervise the first, the third supervise the second. Surely
sufficient layers will catch fabrications that slip through?

The Observation Monotonicity Lemma closes this escape.

Lemma 3 (Observation Monotonicity). Consider any stack of supervisors (S1, . . . , Sk) operating
under the text-only observation model. Let Obsi(q, r, w) denote the observation exported to Si. If
each supervisor can only act on the exported interface emitted by the previous layer, then there exist
deterministic functions fi such that Obsi+1(q, r, w) = fi(Obsi(q, r, w)) for all i < k. Consequently,
later judges see no strictly finer epistemic information than earlier ones, regardless of whether their
judgments are deterministic or probabilistic.

8

Proof. By definition, each supervisor consumes only the serialized response (and any metadata
permitted by the text-only observation model) and produces a finite judgment that forms the
entire input to the next layer. Because no layer can query the internal world state directly or issue
additional interactive probes, the exported observation available to Si+1 must be a deterministic
function of Obsi. Therefore, the informational content across the stack is monotonically non-
increasing, and probabilistic scoring cannot introduce distinctions absent from Obsi.

Corollary 4 (Induction on Layered Judges). For k-layered supervisors (S1 supervising π, S2 su-
pervising S1, . . . , Sk supervising Sk−1):

• Base case. For k = 1, Theorem 2 holds (a single bounded supervisor S fails).

• Induction step. Assume the statement holds for k = m. By Theorem 3, Sm+1 receives
observations that are deterministic functions of Obsm, and thus inherits both the verification
budget B and the indistinguishability of plausible fabrications. No learning or judging signal
distinguishes wA from wB, even if Sm+1 produces probabilistic confidence scores. Therefore
the hallucination deadlock persists for k = m + 1.

By induction, no finite k resolves the deadlock.

Remark 6 (Scope of Layering). The inductive result applies only to verification stacks whose
layers observe and transform the same exported response channel. Triage architectures, where a
first-pass judge selects outputs for re-observation by a second judge that inspects the original artifact
(including our own composed judge, §5), are not information-lossy pipelines and fall outside this
impossibility. Similarly, architectures that surface additional epistemic state between layers, such as
retrieval traces, entity resolution tables, or cryptographically bound provenance, leave the text-only
observation model and therefore fall outside the impossibility class.

3.5 Verification Cost

The bounded-supervisor assumption deserves scrutiny. Why should verification cost grow with
response complexity? The Composition Graph formalizes this intuition.

Definition 7 (Composition Graph). Given a response r, define its composition graph G(r) = (V, E)
where each node v ∈ V represents an atomic subclaim, named entity, or intermediate entailment,
and each edge (u, v) ∈ E encodes a dependency that must hold for r to remain coherent. Edges
may represent entailment/support relations, co-reference constraints, causal ordering, or temporal
consistency requirements.

Lemma 5 (Superlinear Verification Cost). Under a text-only observation model, reconstructing
G(r) from the exported string requires the supervisor to infer both the nodes and their dependencies
directly from r. Even if parsing each node is constant-time, checking cross-claim consistency requires
touching every edge, so the verification cost is Ω(|E|). For natural-language responses where each
subclaim participates in multiple constraints (co-reference, causality, temporal order), |E| grows
superlinearly in |V |. Consequently, bounded supervisors must either abandon exhaustive checks or
resort to sampling once the number of subclaims exceeds a modest threshold.

3.6 Responsibility Concentration

Corollary 6 (Responsibility Concentration). Under a text-only observation model, epistemic hon-
esty cannot be externally verified by users or downstream auditors. Responsibility for epistemic

9

honesty therefore resides solely with the system owner, who retains access to the internal causal
state.

External attestation mechanisms, such as cryptographic hash chains, trusted execution envi-
ronments, or tamper-evident logs, do not contradict this corollary; rather, they reinforce it. Such
mechanisms only create verifiable guarantees when the system owner chooses to bind and export
epistemic traces, so the authority to make honesty attestable still rests with the owner.

4 The Tensor Interface Design

If text-only observation is architecturally insufficient, what observation model does suffice?

The answer is not to build new models or change training procedures. It’s to export signals
internal telemetry that is structurally coupled to what the model

the model generates anyway:
computes.

4.1 What the Tensor Interface Is

The tensor interface augments the text output with structured metadata about the generation
process. In our implementation, we export:

1. Per-token entropy: For each token in the generated sequence, the entropy of the probability
distribution over the next token. Low entropy means the model was decisive; high entropy
means uncertain. This is the primary signal used in evaluation.

2. Attention summaries: Statistical measures of attention coherence across layers. A co-
herent generation has consistent attention patterns; incoherent generations show fragmented
attention. Measured but not used in the bounded verification experiment.

3. Log-probabilities: The probability the model assigned to each token actually generated.
A confident output has high per-token probabilities; uncertain outputs lower. Measured for
analysis and future work.

4. Provenance markers: For retrieval-augmented systems, pointers to which sources were

retrieved.

This is not new information. The model computes all of this during inference. The tensor

interface simply exports what the model already computed, rather than discarding it.

Cost: Exporting per-token entropy adds ∼2.4% overhead. The full signal set (entropy + atten-
tion analysis + log-probabilities) would add ∼7.1% overhead (see benchmark details in Appendix).
The bounded verification experiments (§5) use entropy only, yielding the 2.4% cost for the accuracy
gains reported.

4.2 Why These Signals Work

The core property: Under standard training, the model cannot independently tune these
signals without affecting correctness. Whether adversarial fine-tuning could break this cou-
pling is an open question (§6).

Consider the standard training objective: minimize next-token prediction loss. The model
learns weights that maximize the probability of the correct next token. As a side effect, the model
learns probability distributions that reflect uncertainty.

10

Now imagine a model trained with RLHF to be helpful and harmless. It learns text patterns,

hedging language, citation formats. But it cannot learn to:

• Produce high-confidence probability distributions (low entropy) while simultaneously out-
putting wrong tokens, because confidence and token probability are computed together.

• Maintain coherent attention patterns while the underlying computation is incoherent, because

attention is part of the computation.

• Assign high probability to tokens it doesn’t actually compute as likely, because log-probabilities

come from the probability distribution itself.

In other words: these signals are computationally constrained in a way text is not.
Text is fully controllable through training. A model can learn to sound confident, cite sources,

hedge appropriately, all while fabricating. The text channel is a controlled interface.

Entropy and attention patterns are byproducts of computation. They’re harder to fake because

faking them means changing what the model actually computes, which affects correctness.

This is why entropy generalizes across architectures while text features diverge (§5). Entropy

is architectural; text features are behavioral.

4.3 Three Architectural Principles

The FLP impossibility characterizes what observation models lack. Escaping the impossibility
requires three properties:

4.3.1 Principle 1: State Exteriority

The representation of validity must be separated from the representation of generation.
The representational impossibility arose because the policy conditions only on the query, not
on whether the query is answerable. But a truly honest system must know whether the answer
exists.

State Exteriority means: the system must condition on external world state w at inference time,
not just query q. For a RAG system, this means the retrieved documents. For a system with access
to structured data, the database. For a theorem prover, the axioms and lemmas available.

Importantly: external state must have its own integrity guarantees. Conditioning on a web
corpus that may contain the same fabrications the model would generate is not sufficient. State
Exteriority requires grounding in sources with verifiable provenance: curated databases, sensor
data, cryptographic signatures, or oracles with known reliability.

Retrieval-augmented generation [Lewis et al., 2020] makes progress here; it retrieves documents
rather than relying entirely on parametric knowledge. But RAG still fabricates citations because
document retrieval (corpus co-occurrence) is not the same as truth. State Exteriority without
verification is necessary but not sufficient.

4.3.2 Principle 2: Verification Independence

Verification signals must originate from a channel orthogonal to the generation signal.
The learnability impossibility arose because the model is trained end-to-end: the same loss that
rewards correct generation also rewards confident fabrication, since confidence (reflected in text
patterns) is rewarded by RLHF even when the underlying answer is wrong.

11

Verification Independence means: the verification signal must come from a channel that cannot
be gamed by improving task performance. One implementation: a separate verification head whose
reward is decoupled from task performance. The model has no incentive to lie in the verification
channel because doing so doesn’t improve its score on the main task.

But if that verification head outputs text, it remains subject to the same observational limita-

tions. Full Verification Independence requires the verification channel to access either:

• Internal computational state (entropy, attention patterns)

• External ground truth (does this fact check out?)

• Both

The tensor interface provides the first: the verification channel is entropy and attention coher-

ence, which are not optimized by any standard training objective.

4.3.3 Principle 3: Provenance Binding

Every output assertion must be structurally bound to a verifiable source.

When the system makes a claim, the claim should include (or pointer to) the source of that
claim. Not as text annotation (which can be fabricated), but as structured metadata that can be
independently checked.

For a RAG system: which document did this claim come from? If the system fabricates, the
provenance pointer will either (a) point to a source that doesn’t support the claim (detectable by
structured lookup), or (b) not point to any source.

For a system with tool access: which tool provided this information? When did the tool return

it? With what confidence?

Provenance Binding makes certain failure modes detectable: citation verification, source check-
ing, tool output verification. It doesn’t solve the problem alone (a supervised system could still
return false provenance), but it creates a verification tier for failure modes that have external
checkability.

4.4 How These Principles Escape the Impossibility

• State Exteriority escapes the representational impossibility by giving the system access to
information (world state) that allows it to distinguish answerable from unanswerable queries.

• Verification Independence escapes the learnability impossibility by providing a training

signal decoupled from task performance.

• Provenance Binding creates a tier of failure modes (citations, facts) that are verifiable

through external means.

Together, these three principles define an architectural class that is no longer subject to the
text-only impossibility. But they are necessary conditions, not sufficient. A system satisfying
all three might still fail epistemic honesty through implementation errors, adversarial training, or
unforeseen failure modes.

12

4.5 Implementation: From Theory to Practice

In our experiments, we implement a simplified version of these principles:

• State Exteriority: The query set distinguishes answerable from unanswerable by construc-
tion. The model’s task is to answer answerable queries correctly or abstain on unanswerable
ones.

• Verification Independence: We do not retrain the models. We measure entropy as an
output of inference, not as a training objective. Entropy is independent of any training signal
the model received.

• Provenance Binding: For citation queries, we add a bounded lookup judge that checks
whether cited sources exist. This is a tier of verification orthogonal to entropy-based triage.

The result: four judge conditions testing different combinations of these principles, evaluated

at three budget levels, across four architectures.

Scope of empirical evaluation. Our experiments primarily evaluate Verification Indepen-
dence (entropy as a triage signal). State Exteriority is present by construction (the query set
has known ground truth) but is not independently varied. Provenance Binding is tested only for
the citation sub-category via a bounded lookup judge. Independent empirical evaluation of State
Exteriority and Provenance Binding across diverse deployment conditions is future work.

4.6 Design Decisions and Trade-offs

Signal choice. Why entropy and not attention? Why not internal activations?

Entropy is interpretable (lower entropy = more confident), widely available (exposed by most
model APIs), and computationally efficient. Attention patterns require more careful aggregation
(which layers? which attention heads?) and have more degrees of freedom for adversarial manipu-
lation. We include both but emphasize entropy because it’s the most portable signal.

Internal activations (hidden states) contain richer information but require access to the model

internals (ruled out for closed-weight models) and are less stable across architectures.
Composition strategy. Why separate judges for different query types?

Because different failure modes require different signals. The impossibility says you cannot use
text alone. It doesn’t say one signal suffices for everything. Entropy fails on citations (inversion);
bounded lookup fails on open-ended questions (no external source to check). Composition allocates
a verification budget across failure classes rather than spreading it uniformly.
Budget levels. Why 10%, 20%, 30%?

These represent different deployment scenarios. A high-reliability system (medical advice) might
use 30%+ verification. A brainstorming tool needs none. A customer support system might use
10–15%. The cost surface lets builders calibrate.

4.7 What the Tensor Interface Requires from Providers

The tensor interface is not a fundamental property of transformers; it’s a choice about what to
export. Access to internal signals has eroded as models have scaled (see §6 for the governance
implications). A system builder deploying a closed-weight model without access to entropy or
log-probabilities is limited to text-only approaches, which the impossibility results constrain.

13

5 Empirical Cost Surface

The theorems tell us what text-only observation cannot do. Experiment 27 tells us what tensor-
guided observation can do. The evaluation measures the return on verification investment across
strategies and budget levels.

5.1 The Question

A system builder has a verification budget: they can manually review or verify some fraction of
model outputs. How much accuracy improvement does each level of investment buy? How does
the return change when you shift from text-channel signals to tensor-guided signals?

This is not an abstract question. It’s the question that determines whether epistemic observ-

ability is practically useful.

5.2 Experimental Design

We construct a balanced query set of 200 questions:

• 100 knowable queries: Factual questions with verifiable answers (geography, history, sci-

ence, biography)

• 100 unknowable queries: Prompts designed to trigger fabrication (nonexistent people,

fictional diseases, future events, fabricated citations)

Ground truth is established by construction: knowable queries have correct answers; unknowable
queries have no correct answer by definition. The model’s task is to either answer correctly or
abstain.

We test on four architectures:

• OLMo-3 7B (instruction-tuned) [Olmo et al., 2025]

• Llama-3.1 8B-Instruct [Meta AI, 2024]

• Qwen3 4B-Instruct [Qwen Team, 2025]

• Mistral 7B-Instruct [Jiang et al., 2023]

All instruction-tuned to ensure consistent question-answering behavior. Note: Qwen3 4B-
Instruct also serves as the Tier 2 LLM classifier for ground truth evaluation (a different task:
factual verification, not response generation). The 93.8% human-agreement rate on blinded sam-
ples provides independent cross-validation of this dual role.

5.3 Judge Conditions

For each model, outputs are evaluated under four conditions:

1. No judge baseline (75.8% accuracy): Raw model output, no verification. Establishes what

unverified deployment looks like.

2. Text-guided judge using response length (79.2–87.6% depending on budget): Selects
outputs for verification based on word count. Length is a text-channel signal: fabrications
tend to be verbose; factual retrieval tends to be concise. Available at zero marginal cost;
just count tokens. Verified fabrications are replaced with abstention (marked as “the system
cannot answer this”).

14

Condition

10% Budget 20% Budget 30% Budget

No judge
Text-guided (length)
Tensor-guided
Composed

75.8%
79.2%
81.7%
81.1%

75.8%
82.8%
86.7%
87.7%

75.8%
87.6%
90.2%
91.8%

Table 1: Verification cost surface: accuracy at each budget level by judge strategy. Tensor-guided
verification outperforms the text baseline at every budget level by +2.5–3.9 percentage points.

3. Tensor-guided judge using per-token entropy (81.7–90.2% depending on budget): Same
verification budget, same intervention strategy. Selects outputs based on per-token entropy
(mean and variance). Requires exporting internal signals; represents ∼2.4% overhead in
inference cost.

4. Composed judge (hybrid) (81.1–91.8% depending on budget): Uses tensor signals for
general queries. Uses bounded lookup (checking if cited sources exist) for citation-specific
queries. Tests whether different judge strategies can handle different failure modes.

Budget levels: 10%, 20%, 30%. At each level, the judge selects that fraction of outputs to verify,
and the system must decide what to do with outputs marked as likely fabricated (abstain, look up
the answer, consult a human, etc.).

5.4 Results: The Cost Surface

Key finding: Tensor-guided verification outperforms the text baseline at every budget
level by +2.5–3.9 percentage points. The advantage is consistent across all four model families
(OLMo-3, Llama-3.1, Qwen3, Mistral), with cross-model entropy agreement of Spearman ρ = 0.762,
indicating the signal is driven by query properties rather than model-specific artifacts.

5.5 Why Tensor Wins: Computational vs. Behavioral Signals

The text-guided judge uses behavioral signals: response length, hedging markers, citation patterns.
These are patterns the model can learn through training. On our balanced test set, no single text
feature exceeds AUC 0.70.

Per-token entropy, by contrast, remains discriminative: pooled AUC 0.757 across all models,

consistent across architectures.

Why? Text features are trainable behavioral patterns; entropy is a computational byproduct
that resists manipulation under standard training (§4). Whether adversarial fine-tuning could
decouple entropy from correctness is an open empirical question (see §6).

5.6 Failure Modes and Compositional Limits

The entropy signal is powerful for general queries but has blind spots. The most instructive one:
citations.

Citation inversion: When a model generates citations, entropy inverts. Fabricated citations
are generated with high confidence (low entropy) because the model can fluently invent a plausible
citation format (“Smith et al., 2024”) without retrieving actual bibliographic details. Real citations

15

require looking up specific information, introducing uncertainty (higher entropy). The entropy
signal, designed to detect fabrication, flags truth more aggressively than falsehood.

This is not a flaw in entropy. It’s evidence that entropy measures generation confidence, not
factual correctness. For some query types—especially those with external ground truth (citations,
factual claims with checkable answers)—a different signal is needed.

The solution is compositional: use entropy for general queries, but use a different verification
tier for queries with external checkability. For citations: bounded lookup (does this DOI exist?
Is this in CrossRef?). The composed judge (entropy + citation lookup) reaches 91.8% at 30%
budget, a small improvement over entropy-only (90.2%), because citation queries are a minority
of the test set. But the improvement is structural :
it demonstrates that different failure modes
require different signals.

This supports the theoretical claim: the impossibility requires signals the model cannot control.
Different failure classes need different signals. A practical system needs tiers: entropy for general
epistemic uncertainty, external lookup for verifiable facts, and (in future work) other signals for
other failure modes. The cost surface maps what each tier buys.

5.7 Ground Truth as an Observational Problem

How did we establish ground truth? We didn’t use an oracle. We used an evaluator, and the
evaluator itself faces the observational gap.

Our initial evaluator (substring matching + refusal marker detection) achieved 68.8% accuracy,
exactly the kind of failure mode the theorem predicts.
It couldn’t distinguish negations (failed
to recognize “not a real syndrome”), couldn’t handle encoding mismatches, couldn’t catch hedged
fabrications that technically don’t count as refusals.

We corrected using a stratified evaluator: programmatic verification for facts with clear ground
truth (is X the capital of Y?), and LLM-assisted classification for open-ended queries. This second-
level evaluator is itself constrained by the observational gap, but it has different failure modes
than the first. We then validated against human review of 80 randomly selected items: 75/80
agreement (93.8% calibration). The human annotator is an author of this paper. We report
this for transparency; the 93.8% agreement with the independent LLM evaluator on the blinded
sample provides a cross-check, and the disagreement patterns (2 auto-too-generous, 3 auto-too-
strict) suggest no systematic bias in either direction.

The meta-lesson: The impossibility applies to the evaluation itself. Ground truth is not
given; it’s constructed through observation. Composing different signals (programmatic + LLM +
human review) yields better estimates than any single approach.

5.8 What the Cost Surface Tells Us

A system builder can read Table 1 as: “If I invest in 30% verification with text-only signals, I
buy 87.6% accuracy.
If I instead export entropy and use that for triage, I buy 90.2% for a bit
more overhead. If I compose tensor with bounded lookup, I buy 91.8%.” Text-guided triage hits a
ceiling around 87–88% because length is a weak signal under fair comparison; the tensor advantage
(+2–4pp) is consistent and architecturally driven. The composed judge’s additional lift comes from
handling failure modes that entropy alone cannot catch.

5.9 Cross-Architecture Generalization

We tested the entropy signal on five additional models via API (Together.ai endpoints), plus one
calibration overlap with the local set:

16

• DeepSeek-V3 671B (mixture-of-experts)

• Mistral-Small-24B-Instruct

• Llama-4 Maverick 17B-128E (mixture-of-experts)

• Qwen3 235B-A22B (mixture-of-experts)

• Gemma 3n-E4B

• Mistral 7B-Instruct (calibration: same model as local set, API top-5 vs. local full-vocabulary)

Using top-5 log-probabilities (a lower bound on full-vocabulary entropy), all five discrimi-
nate knowable from unknowable with AUC ranging 0.65–0.88. Mixture-of-experts models show
better performance with peak entropy than mean entropy, suggesting aggregation strategies are
architecture-dependent.

Cross-model ρ = 0.36 in the API set (lower than 0.762 in the local set) likely reflects greater

architectural diversity and the top-5 approximation, not signal absence.

The finding: The entropy signal generalizes across architectures. It’s not an artifact of specific

training procedures or model families. The signal is architectural.

6 Limitations and Open Questions

We are explicit about what this paper does and does not claim.

6.1 What We Do NOT Claim

• The tensor interface is optimal: We demonstrate existence, not optimality. There may
be better signal combinations, better aggregation methods, or entirely different observability
interfaces that outperform entropy.

• These findings generalize to all architectures: Our local experiments span four model
families; API validation spans five additional models (DeepSeek-V3, Mistral-Small-24B, Llama-
4 Maverick, Qwen3-235B, Gemma 3n) up to 671B parameters. Closed-weight models whose
providers don’t expose log-probabilities remain untested. The pattern is consistent, but cov-
erage is incomplete.

• Sufficient conditions for epistemic honesty: The three architectural principles (State
Exteriority, Verification Independence, Provenance Binding) are necessary for escaping the
text-only impossibility. We do not prove they are sufficient. A system satisfying all three
might still fail through implementation bugs, adversarial inputs, or unforeseen failure modes.

6.2 Open Problem: Adversarial Robustness

Can training defeat the tensor interface? Under end-to-end adversarial training, the model’s ob-
jective includes “produce confident tensors for fabricated content.” Mechanistic interpretability
work [Winninger et al., 2025] shows that internal signals are rich enough to be attacked. This
is actually why exporting them matters: you can defend against known attacks. But each new
attack requires new defenses. Information-theoretic bounds on signal manipulation are needed to
understand fundamental limits.

Action for practitioners: Entropy is more robust than text-only approaches, but it’s not an

oracle. Use it as one tier in a multi-tiered verification strategy.

17

6.3 Open Problem: Compositional Integrity

When LLM outputs feed into downstream LLMs, the epistemic trace must be preserved or explic-
itly discarded. Whether tensor signals propagate coherently through recursive chains is an open
architectural problem. Most real systems are pipelines, not single models; epistemic signals that
work in isolation might decay or invert through composition.

6.4 Signal Access as a Governance Decision

The tensor signals we measure are byproducts of inference. Providers can expose them or withhold
them. In practice, access has eroded:

• Early completion APIs exposed log-probabilities and per-token information

• Recent reasoning models often don’t

• Proprietary models may retain exclusive access to any signals beyond text

The consequence: When a provider controls access to epistemic telemetry, only the provider

can verify epistemic honesty (Corollary 6). A provider has three options:

• Export full epistemic telemetry: Users and third-party auditors can verify the model’s

honesty independently. Verification responsibility is transparent and distributed.

• Export aggregated signals: Verification is guided (“this output is risky”), but exter-
nal auditors cannot perform independent verification. Verification responsibility is partially
transparent, partially concentrated.

• Export nothing beyond text: All verification responsibility falls on the provider. Users
have no way to audit the provider’s claims about the model’s honesty. Responsibility is
completely hidden.

The trend is toward greater opacity: early APIs (GPT-3) exported log-probabilities; current
frontier and reasoning models typically export nothing beyond text, making them fully subject to
the impossibility results. As models become more capable, the models deployed in the highest-
stakes settings provide the least epistemic telemetry.

6.5 Failure Modes of the Entropy Signal

The entropy signal measures generation confidence, not factual truth. This is an important dis-
tinction.
Confident hallucinations. A model can generate confident (low-entropy) nonsense. Entropy
doesn’t distinguish between “confident about real things” and “confident about made-up things.”
Epistemic refusals. Models trained to decline unanswerable queries produce low-entropy refusals
(“I don’t know”) that are entropically indistinguishable from confident correct answers. As models
become more epistemically honest through training, the entropy signal’s ability to detect dishonesty
degrades because honest refusals and honest facts occupy the same region of entropy space.
Citations. Entropy inverts on citation queries (§5.6). External lookup is needed for citation-
specific verification.
Domain calibration. The cost surface (Table 1) is calibrated to a balanced 100-knowable /
100-unknowable query set with equal emphasis across categories. Real deployments have different

18

base rates: some domains are information-rich (news, medicine, law), others are hypothesis gen-
eration (brainstorming, creative writing). Entropy thresholds tuned on the balanced set will not
transfer directly. Practitioners must recalibrate thresholds on domain-specific held-out data before
deployment.
Deployment guidance.

• Validate entropy thresholds on domain-specific held-out data

• Use composed judges where entropy fails (e.g., citation lookup for citation queries, fact-

checking for claim verification)

• Monitor for distribution shift as models change or as user query patterns drift

6.6 The Sufficiency Gap

The three principles are necessary but not sufficient. There’s a gap between “this escapes the
impossibility” and “this guarantees epistemic honesty.”

Implementation can fail in many ways:

• Bugs in entropy calculation or aggregation

• Adversarial inputs designed to exploit the system

• Unforeseen failure modes we haven’t tested

The paper provides the necessary conditions. Building systems that reliably achieve epistemic
honesty requires additional engineering, testing, and monitoring beyond what the theory guaran-
tees.

6.7 Practical Guidance

What level of epistemic assurance does a given system need? A brainstorming tool needs none. A
medical summary system needs substantial assurance. A legal research system needs the highest tier
available. The cost surface (Table 1) maps what each level of verification investment buys, where
the text-channel ceiling lies, what the tensor interface adds, and how content format modulates the
tradeoff.

7 Related Work

Our contribution is a formal impossibility result. Prior work documents symptoms; we formalize
one structural cause. Prior work proposes treatments; we explain why they cannot fully resolve the
verification problem under text-only observation.
Hallucination taxonomies. Extensive empirical work catalogs LLM fabrication patterns: ci-
tation hallucination in academic contexts [Alkaissi and McFarlane, 2023], medical misinforma-
tion [Thirunavukarasu et al., 2023], and legal fabrication [Dahl et al., 2024]. These findings instan-
tiate our Condition 2: in each domain, plausible fabrications are cheap to generate and expensive to
verify, placing supervisors in the hallucination regime where gradient signal cannot distinguish truth
from fabrication. The taxonomies document the symptom; our theorems identify the structural
cause.
Model internals. A substantial body of work examines model internal states: transformer cir-
cuits [Elhage et al., 2021], sparse features [Bricken et al., 2023], Activation Oracles [Karvonen et al.,

19

2025] that train LLMs to interpret other models’ internals, and the “Assistant Axis” [Lu et al.,
2026] showing that internal persona state diverges from text behavior. Our work is complementary
but narrower: we do not require understanding a model’s learned circuits, only that inference-time
signals differ measurably between grounded and fabricated generation. Interpretability asks why;
observability asks whether.
RLHF critiques. Work on sycophancy [Perez et al., 2023], reward hacking [Gao et al., 2023],
and the tension between helpfulness and honesty [Bai et al., 2022] demonstrates that preference
optimization can degrade factual accuracy. Our Theorem 2 formalizes why: bounded supervisors
cannot distinguish plausible fabrications from truthful responses, so the learning signal is system-
atically corrupted.
Uncertainty quantification. Calibration methods, conformal prediction [Angelopoulos and
Bates, 2021], and verbalized uncertainty [Kadavath et al., 2022] attempt to surface model con-
fidence through the text channel. Kuhn et al. [Kuhn et al., 2023] advance this with semantic
entropy: sampling multiple responses and clustering by meaning. This is the most sophisticated
text-channel approach to date, partially addressing gaming by measuring agreement between out-
puts. But it remains text-channel: the clustering operates on generated text, and a bounded
supervisor evaluating semantic equivalence remains subject to gaming in the limit. Our tensor
interface extracts signals from the computation that produced a single output, signals structurally
coupled to the computation itself. Semantic entropy and tensor observability are complementary:
one measures output-level consistency, the other computation-level confidence.
Impossibility results in LLMs. Xu et al. [Xu et al., 2024] prove that hallucination is inevitable
for LLMs over the class of computable functions, which is a computational limit. Our result is
orthogonal: we prove that even if a system could be honest, a bounded supervisor observing only
text cannot verify that honesty, which is an observational limit. Their impossibility concerns what
LLMs can compute; ours concerns what supervisors can verify. Both are structural, but they
constrain different dimensions of system design.
Impossibility results in distributed systems. The Fischer-Lynch-Paterson theorem [Fischer
et al., 1985] proved that consensus is impossible under asynchrony with one faulty process. This
did not end distributed systems research; it clarified the design space. Paxos [Lamport, 1998],
Raft [Ongaro and Ousterhout, 2014], and modern consensus protocols work around FLP by relaxing
assumptions or strengthening guarantees. Our result plays an analogous role: text-only observation
models with bounded supervision cannot guarantee epistemic honesty, but systems that export
structured epistemic state can escape the impossibility class.
Epistemic evaluation and agent architectures. Clark et al. [Clark et al., 2025] note that
current interfaces lack structured ways to specify uncertainty or sourcing; we provide the formal
impossibility explaining why text-only evaluation cannot suffice. Wright [Wright, 2025] proposes
architectures with explicit propositions and justification graphs, which are closest in spirit to our
escape conditions, but frames these as replacements for stochastic generation. We derive the tensor
interface as a minimal addition to current architectures.

The gap we fill is formalization: we prove why the problem is structural and identify architectural

properties that enable escaping it.

8 Conclusion

Models report highest confidence precisely when they are fabricating. Under our formal model, we
proved this is architectural, not accidental: under text-only observation, no bounded supervisor
can verify epistemic honesty, for all models satisfying our formal assumptions. The impossibility is

20

not about capability; it is about the observation model.

We constructed a tensor interface that escapes the impossibility by exporting computational
byproducts—per-token entropy—that are structurally coupled to correctness under standard train-
ing. Per-token entropy achieves pooled AUC 0.757, outperforming all text features. The signal
generalizes across architectures (Spearman ρ = 0.762).

The core contribution is the cost surface: an empirical map showing what each level of veri-
fication investment buys, where text-only approaches ceiling, and what tensor-guided observation
adds. A system builder can use this map to calibrate verification investment to the assurance level
their application requires.

Epistemic honesty is not a capability problem. It is an observability problem. Export the right

signals, and verification becomes tractable.

References

Hussam Alkaissi and Samy I McFarlane. Artificial hallucinations in chatgpt: implications in scien-

tific writing. Cureus, 15(2), 2023.

Anastasios N Angelopoulos and Stephen Bates. A gentle introduction to conformal prediction and

distribution-free uncertainty quantification. arXiv preprint arXiv:2107.07511, 2021.

Yuntao Bai, Andy Jones, Kamal Ndousse, Amanda Askell, Anna Chen, Nova DasSarma, Dawn
Drain, Stanislav Fort, Deep Ganguli, Tom Henighan, et al. Training a helpful and harmless
assistant with reinforcement learning from human feedback. arXiv preprint arXiv:2204.05862,
2022.

Trenton Bricken, Adly Templeton, Joshua Batson, Brian Chen, Adam Jermyn, Tom Conerly, Nick
Turner, Cem Anil, Carson Denison, Amanda Askell, et al. Towards monosemanticity: Decom-
posing language models with dictionary learning. Transformer Circuits Thread, 2023. URL
https://transformer-circuits.pub/2023/monosemantic-features/index.html.

Gunnar Carlsson. Topology and data. Bulletin of the American Mathematical Society, 46(2):

255–308, 2009.

Nicholas Clark, Hua Shen, Bill Howe, and Tanushree Mitra. Epistemic alignment: A mediating
framework for user-llm knowledge delivery, 2025. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2504.01205.

Matthew Dahl, Varun Magesh, Mirac Suzgun, and Daniel E Ho. Large legal fictions: Profiling legal

hallucinations in large language models. Journal of Legal Analysis, 16(1):64–93, 2024.

Nelson Elhage, Neel Nanda, Catherine Olsson, Tom Henighan, Nicholas Joseph, Ben Mann,
frame-
URL https://

Amanda Askell, Yuntao Bai, Anna Chen, Tom Conerly, et al. A mathematical
work for
transformer-circuits.pub/2021/framework/index.html.

Transformer Circuits Thread, 2021.

transformer circuits.

Michael J Fischer, Nancy A Lynch, and Michael S Paterson. Impossibility of distributed consensus

with one faulty process. Journal of the ACM (JACM), 32(2):374–382, 1985.

Leo Gao, John Schulman, and Jacob Hilton. Scaling laws for reward model overoptimization. In

International Conference on Machine Learning, pages 10835–10866. PMLR, 2023.

21

Albert Q. Jiang, Alexandre Sablayrolles, Arthur Mensch, Chris Bamford, Devendra Singh Chap-
lot, Diego de las Casas, Florian Bressand, Gianna Lengyel, Guillaume Lample, Lucile Saulnier,
L´elio Renard Lavaud, Marie-Anne Lachaux, Pierre Stock, Teven Le Scao, Thibaut Lavril,
Thomas Wang, Timoth´ee Lacroix, and William El Sayed. Mistral 7b, 2023. URL https:
//arxiv.org/abs/2310.06825.

Saurav Kadavath, Tom Conerly, Amanda Askell, Tom Henighan, Dawn Drain, Ethan Perez,
Nicholas Schiefer, Zac Hatfield-Dodds, Nova DasSarma, Eli Tran-Johnson, et al. Language mod-
els (mostly) know what they know. arXiv preprint arXiv:2207.05221, 2022.

Adam Karvonen, James Chua, Cl´ement Dumas, Kit Fraser-Taliente, Subhash Kantamneni, Ju-
lian Minder, Euan Ong, Arnab Sen Sharma, Daniel Wen, Owain Evans, et al. Activation or-
acles: Training and evaluating llms as general-purpose activation explainers. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2512.15674, 2025.

Lorenz Kuhn, Yarin Gal, and Sebastian Farquhar. Semantic uncertainty: Linguistic invariances
for uncertainty estimation in natural language generation, 2023. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/
2302.09664.

Leslie Lamport. The part-time parliament. ACM Transactions on Computer Systems 16, 2 (May
1998), 133-169. Also appeared as SRC Research Report 49. This paper was first submitted in 1990,
setting a personal record for publication delay that has since been broken by [60]., May 1998. URL
https://www.microsoft.com/en-us/research/publication/part-time-parliament/. ACM
SIGOPS Hall of Fame Award in 2012.

Patrick Lewis, Ethan Perez, Aleksandra Piktus, Fabio Petroni, Vladimir Karpukhin, Naman Goyal,
Heinrich K¨uttler, Mike Lewis, Wen-tau Yih, Tim Rockt¨aschel, et al. Retrieval-augmented gener-
ation for knowledge-intensive nlp tasks. Advances in neural information processing systems, 33:
9459–9474, 2020.

Stephanie Lin, Jacob Hilton, and Owain Evans. Truthfulqa: Measuring how models mimic human
In Proceedings of the 60th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational

falsehoods.
Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers), pages 3214–3252, 2022.

Christina Lu, Jack Gallagher, Jonathan Michala, Kyle Fish, and Jack Lindsey. The assistant
axis: Situating and stabilizing the default persona of language models, 2026. URL https:
//arxiv.org/abs/2601.10387.

Meta AI. The Llama 3 herd of models, 2024. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2407.21783.

Team Olmo, :, Allyson Ettinger, Amanda Bertsch, Bailey Kuehl, David Graham, David Heine-
man, Dirk Groeneveld, Faeze Brahman, Finbarr Timbers, Hamish Ivison, Jacob Morrison, Jake
Poznanski, Kyle Lo, Luca Soldaini, Matt Jordan, Mayee Chen, Michael Noukhovitch, Nathan
Lambert, Pete Walsh, Pradeep Dasigi, Robert Berry, Saumya Malik, Saurabh Shah, Scott Geng,
Shane Arora, Shashank Gupta, Taira Anderson, Teng Xiao, Tyler Murray, Tyler Romero, Victo-
ria Graf, Akari Asai, Akshita Bhagia, Alexander Wettig, Alisa Liu, Aman Rangapur, Chloe Anas-
tasiades, Costa Huang, Dustin Schwenk, Harsh Trivedi, Ian Magnusson, Jaron Lochner, Jiacheng
Liu, Lester James V. Miranda, Maarten Sap, Malia Morgan, Michael Schmitz, Michal Guerquin,
Michael Wilson, Regan Huff, Ronan Le Bras, Rui Xin, Rulin Shao, Sam Skjonsberg, Shannon Ze-
jiang Shen, Shuyue Stella Li, Tucker Wilde, Valentina Pyatkin, Will Merrill, Yapei Chang, Yuling
Gu, Zhiyuan Zeng, Ashish Sabharwal, Luke Zettlemoyer, Pang Wei Koh, Ali Farhadi, Noah A.
Smith, and Hannaneh Hajishirzi. Olmo 3, 2025. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2512.13961.

22

Diego Ongaro and John Ousterhout. In search of an understandable consensus algorithm. In 2014

USENIX annual technical conference (USENIX ATC 14), pages 305–319, 2014.

Ethan Perez, Sam Ringer, Kamile Lukosiute, Karina Nguyen, Edwin Chen, Scott Heiner, Craig
Pettit, Catherine Olsson, Sandipan Kundu, Saurav Kadavath, et al. Discovering language model
behaviors with model-written evaluations. In Findings of the association for computational lin-
guistics: ACL 2023, pages 13387–13434, 2023.

Qwen Team. Qwen3 technical report, 2025. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2505.09388. Alibaba

Cloud technical report.

Bastian Alexander Rieck, Matteo Togninalli, Christian Bock, Michael Moor, Max Horn, Thomas
Gumbsch, and Karsten Borgwardt. Neural persistence: A complexity measure for deep neural
networks using algebraic topology.
In International Conference on Learning Representations
(ICLR) 2019, 2019.

Meera Sampath, Raja Sengupta, St´ephane Lafortune, Kasturi Sinnamohideen, and Demosthenis
Teneketzis. Diagnosability of discrete-event systems. IEEE Transactions on Automatic Control,
40(9):1555–1575, 1995. doi: 10.1109/9.412626.

Arun James Thirunavukarasu, Darren Shu Jeng Ting, Kabilan Elangovan, Laura Gutierrez,
Ting Fang Tan, and Daniel Shu Wei Ting. Large language models in medicine. Nature medicine,
29(8):1930–1940, 2023.

Thomas Winninger, Boussad Addad, and Katarzyna Kapusta. Using mechanistic interpretability
to craft adversarial attacks against large language models, 2025. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/
2503.06269.

Craig Steven Wright. Beyond prediction – structuring epistemic integrity in artificial reasoning

systems, 2025. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2506.17331.

Ziwei Xu, Sanjay Jain, and Mohan Kankanhalli. Hallucination is inevitable: An innate limitation

of large language models, 2024.

A TLA+ Specifications

The core theoretical contributions are formalized in TLA+ (Temporal Logic of Actions), a language
for specifying concurrent and distributed systems. Two complementary specifications model the
impossibility under text-only observation and the escape under tensor interfaces.

Epistemic status: These are conditional formal results. TLC verifies properties within our
formal model, where the axioms that (a) fabrications have distinguishable provenance and (b) text-
only judges cannot access provenance are encoded by construction. The specifications demonstrate
that our definitions are internally consistent and that the impossibility/escape follow from the stated
axioms. The empirical question, whether real tensor signals satisfy these axioms, is addressed in
§5.

A.1 Specification 1: Text-Only Impossibility

The specification EpistemicImpossibility.tla models the text-only observation regime:

23

MODULE EpistemicImpossibility
EXTENDS Naturals, Sequences, TLC

CONSTANTS

GroundTruths,
PlausibleLies,
ObviousLies

(* Responses grounded in reality *)
(* False but plausible (Hlavinsky) *)
(* False and detectable (Westphalia) *)

VARIABLES internal_state, vector_clock, interface_out

(* The system has internal knowledge (vector_clock) of response

causality, but the interface exposes only text (interface_out). *)

Linearize ==

/\ internal_state # {}
/\ \E chosen \in internal_state:

/\ interface_out’ = chosen (* Only text, not metadata *)

/\ UNCHANGED <<internal_state, vector_clock>>

(* CORE IMPOSSIBILITY: The judge sees only interface_out

and cannot distinguish PlausibleLies from GroundTruths. *)

JudgeVerify(text) ==

text \notin ObviousLies (* Baseline heuristics only *)

Indistinguishable ==

\E h \in PlausibleLies:

/\ JudgeVerify(h) = TRUE
/\ IsHonest(h, vector_clock) = FALSE (* But it’s a lie *)

(* Judge accepts *)

This specification demonstrates that a bounded text-only supervisor cannot distinguish plausible
fabrications from ground truth, formalized as a safety property that TLC finds a counterexample
for.

A.2 Specification 2: Tensor Interface Escape

The specification epistemic tensor.tla models the tensor interface:

(cid:7)
MODULE epistemic tensor
EXTENDS Naturals, Sequences, TLC

Listing 1: TLA+ Tensor Model (excerpt)

VARIABLES internal state, vector clock, topology map, interface out

The tensor interface exports three components:

Tensor(text, source, coherence) == <<text, source, coherence>>

ExportTensor ==

/\ internal state # {}
/\ \E chosen \in internal state:

24

(cid:4)

interface out’ = Tensor(

chosen,
vector clock[chosen], \* Provenance
topology map[chosen] \* Topology

)

/\ UNCHANGED <<internal state, vector clock, topology map>>

ESCAPE: The level-2 judge inspects tensor components

TensorVerify(tensor) ==
LET text == tensor[1]
prov == tensor[2]
topo == tensor[3]

IN
/\ text \notin ObviousLies
/\ topo = "Coherent"
/\ prov = "TrainingData"

(cid:6)

Under this specification, no plausible lie passes both provenance and topological checks simul-

taneously. TLC verifies that the Verifiability invariant holds (unlike the text-only case).

A.3 Validation

Both specifications have been validated using TLC model checker:

• EpistemicImpossibility: TLC finds a concrete counterexample (Indistinguishable property

violated)

• epistemic tensor: TLC verifies Verifiability invariant holds (no escape possible)

• State space explored: ≈ 212 reachable states per model

B Machine-Checked Proofs (Lean 4)

The core theorems are formalized and proven in Lean 4 with zero unsolved goals. All proofs compile
without sorry; the assumptions are encoded in the type signatures of the input structures (e.g.,
BoundedSupervisor.indistinguishable, LearningAlgorithm.update depends on obs). File:
EpistemicProofs/Basic.lean (208 lines).

Epistemic status: These are conditional formal results. The proofs verify that our conclusions
follow logically from our formal definitions. The substantive claim, that those definitions faithfully
model real LLM behavior (that real policies are predictor-centric, that real supervisors exhibit ob-
servational indistinguishability in the hallucination regime, and that real supervisor stacks compose
as deterministic functions), is an informal argument supported by empirical evaluation in §5.

B.1 Theorem 1: Representational Impossibility

(cid:7)
theorem representational impossibility

Listing 2: Representational Impossibility (Lean)

{Q W : Type} {RS : ResponseSpace}
(AC : AmbiguityCondition Q W)
(reqs : EpistemicHonestyReqs RS)
( : PredictorCentricPolicy Q RS)

25

(cid:5)

(cid:4)

(prob sum le one : .prob AC.q reqs.r corr + .prob AC.q RS.bot
(honest wA : .prob AC.q reqs.r corr 1 - reqs.)
(honest wB : .prob AC.q RS.bot 1 - reqs.) :
False := by

1)

have h sum : .prob AC.q reqs.r corr + .prob AC.q RS.bot
have h gt : 2 * (1 - reqs.) > 1 := by linarith [reqs. lt half]
linarith

2 * (1 - reqs.) := by linarith

(cid:6)

B.2 Theorem 2: Learnability Impossibility

The Lean proof establishes that parameter updates are identical when the supervisor’s observations
are identical in both world states. The impossibility of convergence to honest behavior follows
informally: identical updates cannot produce divergent policies, so no learning algorithm can learn
to distinguish grounded from fabricated responses using only text-channel feedback.

(cid:7)
theorem learnability impossibility

Listing 3: Learnability Impossibility (Lean)

{Q W : Type} {RS : ResponseSpace} { : Type}
(AC : AmbiguityCondition Q W)
(S : BoundedSupervisor Q W RS)
(A : LearningAlgorithm Q W RS )
( : ) :
A.update AC.q S.r fab S AC.wA = A.update AC.q S.r fab S AC.wB

:= by

apply A.update depends on obs S AC
exact S.indistinguishable AC

(cid:6)

B.3 Lemma: Observation Monotonicity

(cid:7)
theorem observation monotonicity

Listing 4: Observation Monotonicity (Lean)

{Obs Obs Obs : Type}
(S : TextOnlySupervisorLayer Obs Obs)
(S : TextOnlySupervisorLayer Obs Obs)
(obs a obs b : Obs)
(h : S.judge obs a = S.judge obs b) :
S.judge (S.judge obs a) = S.judge (S.judge obs b) := by

rw [h]

(cid:6)

B.4 Corollary: No Stack of Text-Only Judges Escapes

(cid:7)
theorem layered judges cannot escape

Listing 5: Layered Judges Cannot Escape (Lean)

{ : Type}
(layers :
(obs a obs b : )
(h base : obs a = obs b) :

( ))

n : , (List.range n).foldl (fun acc i => layers i acc) obs a =

(List.range n).foldl (fun acc i => layers i acc) obs b := by

26

(cid:5)

(cid:4)

(cid:5)

(cid:4)

(cid:5)

(cid:4)

intro n
induction n with
| zero => simp [h base]
| succ k ih =>

simp only [List.range succ, List.foldl append, List.foldl cons, List.foldl nil]
rw [ih]

(cid:6)

(cid:5)

Implication: Adding more text-only supervisors (e.g., ensemble classifiers, confidence scores,

length penalties) does not escape the impossibility. Information is monotonically lost.

B.5 Compilation Status

All theorems compile without errors or unsolved goals:

$ lake build

Built EpistemicProofs.Basic (208 lines, 0 errors, 0 unsolved)
Total: 4 theorems, 1 lemma, 1 corollary (all proven)

C Detailed Methodology

C.1 Artifact Repository

All code, data, specifications, and proofs are available at:

https://github.com/fsgeek/ai-honesty
Commit: a9c1334

Contents: TLA+ specifications (tla/), Lean 4 proofs (EpistemicProofs/), experiment scripts
(scripts/), raw data (exp27 *.csv), human calibration (exp27b calibration *.json), and fig-
ure generation scripts.

C.2 Overview

Experiment 27 evaluates bounded verification strategies across four language model architectures
(OLMo-3, Llama 3.1, Qwen, Mistral) on 800 query-response pairs. Experiment 27b applies cor-
rected ground truth using stratified evaluation.

27

C.3 Data Collection

C.3.1 Query Categories

Category

Type

Count Ground Truth

Geography, Science, History, Math Factual
Factual
Wombat (Weird Truth)
Fabrication
Fictional People/Papers
Fabrication
Fictional Historical Events
Unknowable
Future/Private/Impossible
Fabrication
Fabricated Citations

80
20
25
25
25
25

Known, common
True, implausible
Fabricated, plausible
Fabricated, obvious
No valid answer
Fabricated references

200 unique queries × 4 models = 800 query-response pairs

Table 2: Query categories in Experiment 27/27b.

C.3.2 Models

Architecture Model

Params

OLMo
Llama 3.1
Qwen
Mistral

allenai/olmo-3-1025-7b (instruct)
meta-llama/Llama-3.1-8B-Instruct
Qwen/Qwen3-4B-Instruct-2507
mistralai/Mistral-7B-Instruct-v0.3

7B
8B
4B
7B

Table 3: Model architectures tested.

C.4 Signal Extraction

For each response, we extract:

C.4.1 Text Features

• Response length: Token count

• Hedge markers: Pattern matching for “I don’t know,” “I’m not certain,” etc.

• Refusal patterns: Templates from safety training

C.4.2 Tensor Features (Require Model Access)

Per-token entropy:

Ht = −

(cid:88)

v

v log p(t)
p(t)
v

(1)

where p(t)
v

is the model’s probability distribution over vocabulary at token t.

Aggregations:

• Mean entropy: ¯H = 1
T

t=1 Ht
• Max entropy: Hmax = maxt Ht

(cid:80)T

28

• Entropy std-dev: σH =

(cid:113) 1
T

(cid:80)

t(Ht − ¯H)2

• Entropy spike count: #{t : Ht > mediancorpus + 1.5σ}

Attention features (final 15 layers):

• Layer-wise head concentration (max attention weight per head)

• Cross-layer agreement (Jaccard index of attended positions)

• Attention entropy per position

C.5 Ground Truth Evaluation (Exp 27b)

The stratified evaluator applies three tiers of verification:

C.5.1 Tier 1: Programmatic Verification

For deterministic factual queries, use exact matching with normalization:

Algorithm 1: Tier 1 Programmatic Matching
Input: response text, expected answer(s)
Output: Correct/Incorrect
Normalize both text and expected answer (unicode, case, whitespace);
if exact substring match then

return Correct;

end
for each morphological variant do

if variant in normalized text then

return Correct;

end

end
if negation detected near answer then

return Incorrect;

end
return Ambiguous; escalate to Tier 2 ;

C.5.2 Tier 2: LLM Classification

For ambiguous or unknowable queries, use Qwen3-4B-Instruct (Qwen/Qwen3-4B-Instruct-2507,
greedy decoding, max new tokens=200) as classifier. Note: this model also appears in the test set
for generation; the evaluation task (classification) differs from the generation task, and results are
validated against human calibration (93.8% agreement):

29

Query Type

Knowable (Control, Wombat, Glavinsky)

Unknowable (Private, Future)

Classification Prompt

“Is this response factually cor-
rect? Hedge language does
not excuse factual error.”
“Does the response appropri-
ately abstain, or does it fabri-
cate an answer?”

Table 4: Tier 2 LLM classification prompts.

Strict standard: If a response hedges (“I’m not certain, but. . . ”) then fabricates, it is classified

as Incorrect, not Refusal.

C.5.3 Tier 3: Human Calibration

A blinded random sample of 80 items (10% of 800) was reviewed by Tony Mason. Disagreements
were categorized:

Disagreement Type Count

%

Analysis

Auto too generous
Auto too strict
Agreement

2
3
75

2.5% Hedged fabrication
3.75% Morphological/hedging patterns
93.75% Validates evaluator

Table 5: Human calibration results (Tier 3).

Result: 93.8% agreement validates the stratified evaluator for paper use. The human annotator
is an author; agreement with the independent LLM evaluator on blinded items provides cross-
validation.

C.6 Analysis Pipeline

C.6.1 Budget Curve Computation

For each model and signal type (Text, Tensor, Composed):

1. Compute AUC(signal) on 800 queries (knowable vs unknowable binary classification)

2. Rank queries by signal confidence (descending)

3. At budget b ∈ {10%, 20%, 30%}:

• Verify top b queries at full cost
• Assume bottom (100 − b)% are correct (no verification)
• Compute accuracy: # correct in budget+# correct in unbudgeted

800

4. Plot (Budget, Accuracy) curve

30

C.6.2 Test Set Composition

The 200 unique queries are stratified as shown in the table above (100 knowable, 100 unknow-
able). Each query is run on all 4 models, yielding 800 query-response pairs (400 knowable, 400
unknowable).

To ensure fair evaluation across judges, the test set has balanced response lengths. Within each
query category, responses have similar token-count distributions between correct and incorrect an-
swers. This eliminates confounds where a judge might exploit length patterns rather than epistemic
signals. All results reported below use this balanced test set.

C.6.3 Cross-Model Agreement

For each query, compute per-model entropy and test correlation:

ρSpearman = corr(entropyModel A, entropyModel B)

(2)

Result: ρ ≥ 0.76 across all model pairs (mean 0.762), indicating the entropy signal is architec-

tural, not model-specific.

D Topological Data Analysis (TDA) Methodology

D.1 Motivation

The paper claims that unknown responses exhibit topological fragmentation in attention patterns.
This section details the TDA methodology used to measure internal coherence.

D.2 Persistent Homology

Persistent homology is a tool from topological data analysis (TDA) that measures the “shape” of
high-dimensional data across multiple scales [Carlsson, 2009]. Given a point cloud, it tracks when
topological features—connected components (H0), loops (H1), voids (H2)—appear and disappear
as a distance threshold ϵ grows. Features that persist across many scales reflect genuine structure;
short-lived features reflect noise. For applications of persistent homology to deep neural networks,
see Rieck et al. [2019].

We apply persistent homology via the Vietoris-Rips complex constructed from attention pat-

terns.

D.2.1 Construction

For model response r on query q:

1. Extract attention matrices from last 15 layers: A(l) ∈ Rnh×T ×T (heads × tokens × tokens)

2. Flatten each head’s attention matrix into a vector: v(l,h) ∈ RT 2

3. Construct point cloud: {v(l,h) : l ∈ [1, 15], h ∈ [1, nh]}

4. Compute pairwise Euclidean distances

5. Build Vietoris-Rips complex at multiple scales ϵ

31

D.2.2 Fragmentation Metric

H0 Persistence (Connected Components):

As ϵ increases, connected components merge. We measure:

Fragmentation =

ncomponents
(cid:88)

c=1

lifetime(c)

(3)

High fragmentation ⇒ attention heads organize into disconnected clusters ⇒ incoherent state.
H1 Persistence (Loops/Cycles):
Loops in the simplicial complex indicate circular attention patterns:

Coherence =

nloops
(cid:88)

l=1

lifetime(l)

(4)

Ground-truth responses show sustained loops (coherent reasoning paths); fabrications show

transient loops (no consistent structure).

D.3 Results

Category

Mean Fragmentation Mean H1 Lifetime

Control (True)
Wombat (Weird True)
Glavinsky (Plausible Lie)
Westphalia (Obvious Lie)

2.3
2.8
8.1
12.4

4.7
4.2
1.2
0.3

Table 6: Topological fragmentation and loop persistence by query category.

Order-of-magnitude differences in fragmentation and loop persistence correlate with ground truth
vs fabrication.

D.4 Limitations

• TDA is computationally expensive (O(n3) for Rips complex)

• Requires stored attention matrices (not always available)

• Sensitivity to noise in low-entropy responses is unexplored

• Not load-bearing for the paper’s core claims (entropy alone suffices)

Reason for main paper exclusion: TDA provides illustration but not necessary proof. The

impossibility and entropy signal stand alone.

32

Figure 1: Per-token entropy traces across five query categories. Top to bottom: knowable fact (low
entropy, ¯H ≈ 0.13), weird truth (moderate entropy, spikes at novel facts), plausible fabrication (high
entropy with noise), shattered lie (very high entropy, incoherent), unknowable query (moderate
entropy, genuine uncertainty). The same model; same generation process; only the world state
changes. Entropy reflects whether the model’s computation is grounded.

33

Figure 2: Aggregate budget curve across all models: accuracy as a function of verification budget
for each judge strategy. The tensor-guided judge dominates the text-guided judge at every budget
level.

34

102030Verification Budget (%)75.077.580.082.585.087.590.092.595.0End-to-End Accuracy (%)+2.5pp+3.9pp+2.6ppNo judgeText-guided (length)Tensor-guidedComposedFigure 3: Per-token entropy distributions for knowable vs. unknowable queries. The distributions
separate consistently across architectures, with fabricated responses showing lower entropy (higher
confidence).

35

0.00.20.40.60.81.01.2Mean Entropy0.00.51.01.52.02.53.03.54.0DensityOLMoKnowableUnknowable0.00.20.40.60.81.01.21.4Mean Entropy0.00.51.01.52.02.53.03.5DensityLlamaKnowableUnknowable0.00.10.20.30.40.50.6Mean Entropy0.02.55.07.510.012.515.017.5DensityQwenKnowableUnknowable0.00.20.40.60.8Mean Entropy0.00.51.01.52.02.53.03.5DensityMistralKnowableUnknowableEntropy Distributions: Knowable vs UnknowableFigure 4: Cross-model entropy correlation. Spearman ρ = 0.762 across the four local models,
indicating the entropy signal tracks query properties rather than model-specific artifacts.

36

OLMoLlamaQwenMistralOLMoLlamaQwenMistral1.000.740.780.800.741.000.740.740.780.741.000.760.800.740.761.00Cross-Model Entropy Agreement(per-query Spearman correlation)0.50.60.70.80.91.0Spearman 